>> Woodruff: NELSON MANDELA HAS
DIED AT HOME IN JOHANESBURG,
SOUTH AFRICA, AT THE AGE OF 95.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE MEMBREER MANDELA, A TOWERING
MAN WHOSE PASSION, SACRIFICE AND
BATTLE AGAINST APARTHIED CHANGED
SOUTH AFRICA AND THE WORLD.
>> Woodruff: TONIGHT WE DEVOTE
OUR WHOLE PROGRAM TO LIFE AND
LEGACY OF NELSON MANDELA.
>> Ifill: NELSON MANDELA'S DEATH
WAS FORMALLY ANNOUNCED LATE
TODAY BY SOUTH AFRICA'S CURRENT
PRESIDENT JACOB ZUMA.
HE EXPRESSED THE COUNTRY'S LOVE
AND SENSE OF LOSS FOR THEIR
ICONIC LEADER, OFTEN REFERRED
TO, OUT OF RESPECT, BY HIS CLAN
NAME, MADIBA.
>> OUR BELOVED MANDELA, THEFOUNR
DEMOCRATIC NATION, HAS DEPARTED.
HE PASSED ON PEACEFULLY, IN THE
COMPANY OF HIS FAMILY, AROUND
2050, ON THE 5th OF DECEMBER,
2013.
HE IS NOW RESTING.
HE IS NOW AT PEACE.
IS OUR NATION HAS LOST -- OUR
NATION HAS LOST ITS GREATEST
SON.
OUR PEOPLE HAVE LOST A FATHER.
ALTHOUGH WE KNEW THAT THIS DAY
WOULD COME, NOTHING CAN DIMINISH
OUR SENSE OF THE PROFOUND AND
ENDURING LOSS.
HIS KIND OF STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM
AND IN THE RESPECT OF THE WORLD,
HIS HUMILITY, HIS COMBUSTION HU,
OUR THOUGHTS AND PRAYERS ARE
WITH THE MANDELA FAMILY, OUR
THOUGHTS ARE WITH THE SOUTH
AFRICAN PEOPLE, WHO TODAY, MOURN
THE LOSS OF THE ONE PRESIDENT
WHO, MORE THAN ANY OTHER, CAME
TO EMBODY THEIR SENSE OF A
COMMON NATION.
OUR THOUGHTS ARE WITH THE
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE ACROSS THE
WORLD WHO EMBRACED MADIBA AS
THEIR OWN.
AND WHO SAW HIS CAUSE AS THEIR
CAUSE.
THIS IS THE MOMENT OF OUR
DEEPEST SORROW.
OUR NATION HAS LOST ITS GREATEST
SON.
YET WHAT MADE NELSON MANDELA
FREIGHT WAS PRECISELY WHAT MADE
HIM HUMAN.
WE SAW IN HIM WHAT WE SEEK IN
OUR SELVES.
AS WHEREVER WE ARE, IN THE
COUNTRY AND WHEREVER WE ARE IN
THE WORLD, LET US RECALL THE
VALUES FOR WHICH MADIBA FOUGHT.
LET US REAFFIRM A SOCIETY IN
WHICH NONE IS AS GREATEST
OPPRESSED OR DISPOSSESSED OF
ANOTHER.
T US COMMIT OURSELVES TO
STRIVE TOGETHER, SPELLING
NEITHER STRENGTH NOR COURAGE, TO
BUILD A UNITED, NONRACIAL,
NONSEXIST, DEMOCRATIC AND
PROSPEROUS SOUTH AFRICA.
LET US EXPRESS EACH IN OUR OWN
WAY, THE DEEP GRATITUDE WE FEEL
FOR A LIFE SPENT IN SERVICE OF
THE PEOPLE OF THIS COUNTRY.
AND IN THE CAUSE OF HUMANITY.
THAT IS INDEED THE MOMENT OF OUR
DEEPEST SORROW.
YET, IT MUST ALSO BE THE MOMENT
OF OUR GREATEST DETERMINATION.
A DETERMINATION TO LIVE AS
MADIBA HAS LIVED, TO STRIVE AS
HE HAS STRIVED, AND TO NOT REST
UNTIL WE HAVE REALIZED HIS
VISION OF A TRULY UNITED SOUTH
AFRICA.
A PEACEFUL AND PROSPEROUS
AND A BETTER WORLD.
AFRICA.
WE WILL ALWAYS LOVE MADIBA.
AND A BETTER WORLD.
MAY HIS SOUL REST IN PEACE.
WE WILL ALWAYS LOVE MADIBA.
GOD BLESS AFRICA.
MAY HIS SOUL REST IN PEACE.
>> THAT WAS SOUTH AFRICA'SPRESI.
GOD BLESS AFRICA.
THIS EVENING AT THE WHITE HOUSE,
>> THAT WAS SOUTH AFRICA'SPRESI.
PRESIDENT OBAMA EXPRESSED HIS
THIS EVENING AT THE WHITE HOUSE,
CONDOLENCES TO NELSON MANDELA'S
PRESIDENT OBAMA EXPRESSED HIS
FAMILY AND PRAISED THE
CONDOLENCES TO NELSON MANDELA'S
TRANSFORMATIVE LEADER.
FAMILY AND PRAISED THE
>> AT HIS TRIAL IN 1964, NELSONM
TRANSFORMATIVE LEADER.
THE DOCK SAYING, I HAVE FOUGHT
>> AT HIS TRIAL IN 1964, NELSONM
AGAINST WHITE DOMINATION, AND I
THE DOCK SAYING, I HAVE FOUGHT
HAVE FOUGHT AGAINST BLACK
AGAINST WHITE DOMINATION, AND I
DOMINATION.
HAVE FOUGHT AGAINST BLACK
I HAVE CHERISHED THE IDEAL OF A
DOMINATION.
DEMOCRATIC AND FREE SOCIETY IN
I HAVE CHERISHED THE IDEAL OF A
WHICH ALL PERSONS LIVE TOGETHER
DEMOCRATIC AND FREE SOCIETY IN
IN HARMONY AND WITH EQUAL
WHICH ALL PERSONS LIVE TOGETHER
OPPORTUNITIES.
IN HARMONY AND WITH EQUAL
IT IS AN IDEAL WHICH I HOPE TO
OPPORTUNITIES.
BE, IT IS AN IDEALHIEVE.
IT IS AN IDEAL WHICH I HOPE TO
FOR WHICH I AM PREPARED TO DIE.
BE, IT IS AN IDEALHIEVE.
NELSON MANDELA LIVED FOR THAT
FOR WHICH I AM PREPARED TO DIE.
IDEAL AND HE MADE IT REAL.
NELSON MANDELA LIVED FOR THAT
TO ACHIEVE MORE THAN COULD BE
IDEAL AND HE MADE IT REAL.
EXPECTED OF ANY MAN.
TO ACHIEVE MORE THAN COULD BE
AND TODAY HE'S GONE HOME AND
EXPECTED OF ANY MAN.
WE'VE LOST ONE OF THE MOST
AND TODAY HE'S GONE HOME AND
INFLUENTIAL, COURAGEOUS AND
WE'VE LOST ONE OF THE MOST
PROFOUNDLY GOOD HUMAN BEINGS
INFLUENTIAL, COURAGEOUS AND
THAT ANY OF US WILL SHARE TIME
PROFOUNDLY GOOD HUMAN BEINGS
WITH ON THIS EARTH.
THAT ANY OF US WILL SHARE TIME
HE NO LONGER BELONGS TO US.
WITH ON THIS EARTH.
HE BELONGS TO THE AGES.
HE NO LONGER BELONGS TO US.
THROUGH HIS FIERCE DIGNITY AND
HE BELONGS TO THE AGES.
UNBENDING WELFARE SACRIFICING
THROUGH HIS FIERCE DIGNITY AND
HIS OWNING LIVE FOR THE FREEDOM
UNBENDING WELFARE SACRIFICING
OF OTHERS, MADIBA, SACRIFICED,
HIS OWNING LIVE FOR THE FREEDOM
FOR OTHERS, IN THE BELIEF THAT
OF OTHERS, MADIBA, SACRIFICED,
HUMAN BEINGS CAN CHANGE FOR THE
FOR OTHERS, IN THE BELIEF THAT
BETTER, RECONCILE THOSE WHO
HUMAN BEINGS CAN CHANGE FOR THE
JAILED HIM, SET AN EXAMPLE THAT
BETTER, RECONCILE THOSE WHO
ALL HUMANITY SHOULD ASPIRE TO
JAILED HIM, SET AN EXAMPLE THAT
WHERE IN THE LIVES OF NATIONS OR
ALL HUMANITY SHOULD ASPIRE TO
OUR OWN PERSONAL LIVES.
WHERE IN THE LIVES OF NATIONS OR
AND THE FACT THAT HE DID IT ALL
OUR OWN PERSONAL LIVES.
WITH GRACE AND WITH HUMOR AND
AND THE FACT THAT HE DID IT ALL
ABILITY TO ACKNOWLEDGE HIS OWN
WITH GRACE AND WITH HUMOR AND
IMPEIMPERFECTIONS, ONLY MAKES TE
ABILITY TO ACKNOWLEDGE HIS OWN
MAN MORE REMARKABLE.
IMPEIMPERFECTIONS, ONLY MAKES TE
HE SET ONCE, I'M NOT A SAINT,
MAN MORE REMARKABLE.
UNLESS YOU CONSIDER A SAINT A
HE SET ONCE, I'M NOT A SAINT,
SINNER WHO KEEPS ON TRYING.
UNLESS YOU CONSIDER A SAINT A
I'M ONE OF THE COUNTLESS
SINNER WHO KEEPS ON TRYING.
MILLIONS WHO DRAW INSPIRATION
I'M ONE OF THE COUNTLESS
FROM NELSO NELSON MANDELA'S LIF.
MILLIONS WHO DRAW INSPIRATION
MY VERY FIRST POLITICAL ACTION,
FROM NELSO NELSON MANDELA'S LIF.
THE VERY FIRST THING I EVER DID
MY VERY FIRST POLITICAL ACTION,
THAT INVOLVED AN ISSUE OR POLICY
THE VERY FIRST THING I EVER DID
OR POLITICS WAS A PROTEST
THAT INVOLVED AN ISSUE OR POLICY
AGAINST APARTHEID.
OR POLITICS WAS A PROTEST
I WOULD STUDY HIS WORDS AND HIS
AGAINST APARTHEID.
WRITES, AND THE DAY HE WAS --
I WOULD STUDY HIS WORDS AND HIS
WRITINGS, AND THE DAY HE WAS
WRITES, AND THE DAY HE WAS --
RELEASED FROM PRISON GAVE ME A
WRITINGS, AND THE DAY HE WAS
SENSE OF WHAT HUMAN BEINGS CAN
RELEASED FROM PRISON GAVE ME A
DO WHEN THEY'RE GUIDED BY THEIR
SENSE OF WHAT HUMAN BEINGS CAN
HOPES AND NOT BY THEIR FEARS AND
DO WHEN THEY'RE GUIDED BY THEIR
LIKE SO MANY AROUND THE GLOBE I
HOPES AND NOT BY THEIR FEARS AND
CAN'T IMAGINE ANY OWN LIFE
LIKE SO MANY AROUND THE GLOBE I
WITHOUT THE EXAMPLE THAT NELSON
CAN'T IMAGINE ANY OWN LIFE
MANDELA SET.
WITHOUT THE EXAMPLE THAT NELSON
AND SO LONG AS I WILL LIVE I
MANDELA SET.
WILL DO WHAT I CAN TO LEARN FROM
AND SO LONG AS I WILL LIVE I
HIM.
WILL DO WHAT I CAN TO LEARN FROM
TO GRACA AND HIS FAMILY,
HIM.
MICHELLE AND MY FAMILY, SEND
TO GRACA AND HIS FAMILY,
THEM GOOD WISHES AND I ONLY HOPE
MICHELLE AND MY FAMILY, SEND
THE TIME SPENT WITH HIS LAST FEW
THEM GOOD WISHES AND I ONLY HOPE
WEEKS, BROUGHT STRENGTH AND
THE TIME SPENT WITH HIS LAST FEW
COMFORT TO HIS FAMILY.
WEEKS, BROUGHT STRENGTH AND
TO THE PEOPLE OF SOUTH AFRICA,
COMFORT TO HIS FAMILY.
WE DRAW STRENGTH FROM THE
TO THE PEOPLE OF SOUTH AFRICA,
RENEWAL AND RESILIENCE THAT YOU
WE DRAW STRENGTH FROM THE
MADE REAL.
RENEWAL AND RESILIENCE THAT YOU
A FREE SOUTH AFRICA, AT PEACE
MADE REAL.
WITH ITSELF.
A FREE SOUTH AFRICA, AT PEACE
THAT IS AN EXAMPLE TO THE WORLD.
WITH ITSELF.
AND THAT IS MADIBA'S LEGACY TO
THAT IS AN EXAMPLE TO THE WORLD.
THE NATION THAT HE LOVED.
AND THAT IS MADIBA'S LEGACY TO
WE WILL NOT LIKELY SEE THE LIKES
THE NATION THAT HE LOVED.
OF NELSON MANDELA AGAIN.
WE WILL NOT LIKELY SEE THE LIKES
SO IT FALLS TO US, AS BEST WE
OF NELSON MANDELA AGAIN.
CAN, TO FORWARD THE EXAMPLE THAT
SO IT FALLS TO US, AS BEST WE
HE SET, TO MAKE DECISIONS GUIDED
CAN, TO FORWARD THE EXAMPLE THAT
NOT BY HATE, BUT BY LOVE.
HE SET, TO MAKE DECISIONS GUIDED
NEVER DISCOUNT THE DIFFERENCE
NOT BY HATE, BUT BY LOVE.
THAT ONE PERSON CAN MAKE, TO
NEVER DISCOUNT THE DIFFERENCE
STRIVE FOR A FUTURE THAT IS
THAT ONE PERSON CAN MAKE, TO
WORTHY OF HIS SACRIFICE.
STRIVE FOR A FUTURE THAT IS
FOR NOW, LET US PAUSE AND GIVE
WORTHY OF HIS SACRIFICE.
THANKS FOR THE FACT THAT NELSON
FOR NOW, LET US PAUSE AND GIVE
MANDELA LIVED.
THANKS FOR THE FACT THAT NELSON
A PLAN WHO TOOK HISTORY IN HIS
MANDELA LIVED.
HANDS AND BENT THE ARC OF MORAL
A PLAN WHO TOOK HISTORY IN HIS
UNIVERSE TOWARDS JUSTICE.
HANDS AND BENT THE ARC OF MORAL
MAY GOD BLESS HIS MEMORY AND
UNIVERSE TOWARDS JUSTICE.
KEEP IT IN
MAY GOD BLESS HIS MEMORY AND
>> Ifill: OTHER REACTION BEGAN
KEEP IT IN
COMING IN FROM THE U.S. AND
>> Ifill: OTHER REACTION BEGAN
AROUND THE WORLD.
COMING IN FROM THE U.S. AND
IN NEW YORK, BAN KI MOON:
AROUND THE WORLD.
WE HAVE TO LEARN FROM THE WISDOM
IN NEW YORK, BAN KI MOON:
AND DETERMINATION AND COMMITMENT
WE HAVE TO LEARN FROM THE WISDOM
FROM BOTH PRESIDENT MANDELA TO
AND DETERMINATION AND COMMITMENT
MAKE THIS WORLD BETTER FOR ALL.
FROM BOTH PRESIDENT MANDELA TO
FORMER PRESIDENT GEORGE H.W.
MAKE THIS WORLD BETTER FOR ALL.
BUSH ISSUED A STATEMENT SAYING
FORMER PRESIDENT GEORGE H.W.
OF MANDELA, "HE WAS A MAN OF
BUSH ISSUED A STATEMENT SAYING
TREMENDOUS MORAL COURAGE WHO
OF MANDELA, "HE WAS A MAN OF
CHANGED THE COURSE OF HISTORY IN
TREMENDOUS MORAL COURAGE WHO
HIS COUNTRY.
CHANGED THE COURSE OF HISTORY IN
AND IN ANOTHER STATEMENT, FORMER
HIS COUNTRY.
PRESIDENT JIMMY CARTER SAID,
AND IN ANOTHER STATEMENT, FORMER
"HIS PASSION FOR FREEDOM AND
PRESIDENT JIMMY CARTER SAID,
JUSTICE CREATED NEW HOPE FOR
"HIS PASSION FOR FREEDOM AND
GENERATIONS OF OPPRESSED PEOPLE
JUSTICE CREATED NEW HOPE FOR
WORLDWIDE.
GENERATIONS OF OPPRESSED PEOPLE
AND NOW TO A PERSONAL
WORLDWIDE.
RETROSPECTIVE ON THE LIFE OF
AND NOW TO A PERSONAL
NELSON MANDELA FROM ONE OF OUR
RETROSPECTIVE ON THE LIFE OF
OWN.
NELSON MANDELA FROM ONE OF OUR
FORMER "NEWSHOUR" SENIOR
OWN.
CORRESPONDENT CHARLAYNE HUNGER
FORMER "NEWSHOUR" SENIOR
GAULT COVERED THE SOUTH AFRICAN
CORRESPONDENT CHARLAYNE HUNGER
LEADER FOR MORE THAN A DECADE,
GAULT COVERED THE SOUTH AFRICAN
AND INTERVIEWED HIM ON A NUMBER
LEADER FOR MORE THAN A DECADE,
OF OCCASIONS, FROM THE TIME HE
AND INTERVIEWED HIM ON A NUMBER
LEFT PRISON TO HIS ELECTION AS
OF OCCASIONS, FROM THE TIME HE
SOUTH AFRICA'S PRESIDENT.
LEFT PRISON TO HIS ELECTION AS
SHE PREPARED THIS REMEMBRANCE.
SOUTH AFRICA'S PRESIDENT.
>> TO MY GENERATION, THE ONETHA,
SHE PREPARED THIS REMEMBRANCE.
NELSON MANDELA WAS A TOWERING
>> TO MY GENERATION, THE ONETHA,
MAN OF MYTH AND LEGEND, OF
NELSON MANDELA WAS A TOWERING
ACTION AND PASSION, OF SELFLESS
MAN OF MYTH AND LEGEND, OF
SACRIFICE AND BEFORE ANY OF US
ACTION AND PASSION, OF SELFLESS
DREAMED HE BECAME THE EMBODIMENT
SACRIFICE AND BEFORE ANY OF US
OF A NOTORIOUS DECADES LONG
DREAMED HE BECAME THE EMBODIMENT
STRUGGLING AGAINST OPPRESSION,
OF A NOTORIOUS DECADES LONG
THESE WERE IMAGES FROM THE BOOK,
STRUGGLING AGAINST OPPRESSION,
MANDELA, THE AUTHORIZED
THESE WERE IMAGES FROM THE BOOK,
PORTRAIT, HELPS TELL THE STORY
MANDELA, THE AUTHORIZED
OF MANDELA'S LONG ROAD TO
PORTRAIT, HELPS TELL THE STORY
FREEDOM,.
OF MANDELA'S LONG ROAD TO
>>> BORN IN 1818 ON -- 1918 ONS,
FREEDOM,.
THE LEGEND WAS NURTURED.
>>> BORN IN 1818 ON -- 1918 ONS,
SPENDING SOME OF THE HAPPIEST
THE LEGEND WAS NURTURED.
YEARS OF HIS BOYHOOD, THIS IS A
SPENDING SOME OF THE HAPPIEST
GENTLE PLACE OF ROLLING HILLS
YEARS OF HIS BOYHOOD, THIS IS A
AND FARMS, WHERE CHILDREN STILL
GENTLE PLACE OF ROLLING HILLS
PLAY AS HE DID.
AND FARMS, WHERE CHILDREN STILL
IN TIMES, THEY WOULD CALL HIM
PLAY AS HE DID.
MADIBA, HIS CLAN NAME FOR
IN TIMES, THEY WOULD CALL HIM
RESPECT.
MADIBA, HIS CLAN NAME FOR
HERE, BOYS EVEN ONES LIKE
RESPECT.
MANDELA DESCENDED BY ROYALTY,
HERE, BOYS EVEN ONES LIKE
WERE TRADITION THAT TAUGHT
MANDELA DESCENDED BY ROYALTY,
RESPECT AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR
WERE TRADITION THAT TAUGHT
OTHERS.
RESPECT AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR
AS MANDELA GREW INTO MANHOOD,
OTHERS.
THE KOSA MANTLE, DEPRIVED AND
AS MANDELA GREW INTO MANHOOD,
DEMEDIAN MANDELA AND HIS FELLOW
THE KOSA MANTLE, DEPRIVED AND
AFRICANS.
DEMEDIAN MANDELA AND HIS FELLOW
IN 1948, OPPRESSION WAS
AFRICANS.
LEGALIZED INTO A SYSTEM KNOWN AS
IN 1948, OPPRESSION WAS
APARTHEID.
LEGALIZED INTO A SYSTEM KNOWN AS
AS A YOUNG LAWYER IN THE
APARTHEID.
1940s, MANDELA JOINED THE
AS A YOUNG LAWYER IN THE
AFRICAN NATIONAL CONGRESS, AN
1940s, MANDELA JOINED THE
ORGANIZATION THAT PEACEFULLY
AFRICAN NATIONAL CONGRESS, AN
PURSUED RIGHTS FOR SOUTH
ORGANIZATION THAT PEACEFULLY
AFRICANS.
PURSUED RIGHTS FOR SOUTH
STAGING MASS RALLIES AND STRIKES
AFRICANS.
AGAINST APARTHEID'S UNJUST LAWS.
STAGING MASS RALLIES AND STRIKES
BUT BY 1960s THE HARSH RIGHT'S
AGAINST APARTHEID'S UNJUST LAWS.
RESISTANCE TO THE PEACEFUL
BUT BY 1960s THE HARSH RIGHT'S
PROCESS, CAW CAUSED MANDELA AND
RESISTANCE TO THE PEACEFUL
HIS COLLEAGUES TO FORM A
PROCESS, CAW CAUSED MANDELA AND
MILITARY WING OPERATING
HIS COLLEAGUES TO FORM A
UNDERGROUND.
MILITARY WING OPERATING
THEIR CAUSE WAS CALLED SPIRIT OF
UNDERGROUND.
THE NATION, AIMED AT CIVIL
THEIR CAUSE WAS CALLED SPIRIT OF
INSTALLATIONS AND NOT SOFT OR
THE NATION, AIMED AT CIVIL
HUMAN TARGETS BUT IN TIMES CAN,
INSTALLATIONS AND NOT SOFT OR
THE ANC THEIR ACTS BORE NO
HUMAN TARGETS BUT IN TIMES CAN,
COMPARISON TO THE THOUSANDS
THE ANC THEIR ACTS BORE NO
MURDERED IN OTHERWISE
COMPARISON TO THE THOUSANDS
DISAPPEARED BY THE REGIME.
MURDERED IN OTHERWISE
>> THERE ARE MANY PEOPLE WHOFEED
DISAPPEARED BY THE REGIME.
FUTILE FOR US TO CONTINUE
>> THERE ARE MANY PEOPLE WHOFEED
TALKINTALKING PEACE AND NONVIOLE
FUTILE FOR US TO CONTINUE
AGAINST A GOVERNMENT WHOSE REPLY
TALKINTALKING PEACE AND NONVIOLE
IS ONLY SAVAGE ATTACKS.
AGAINST A GOVERNMENT WHOSE REPLY
WELL I'M ON THE DEFENSELE
IS ONLY SAVAGE ATTACKS.
PEOPLE.
WELL I'M ON THE DEFENSELE
>> IN 1962 A VISHZ CRACK DOWNWAS
PEOPLE.
CAUGHT UP IN THE REGIME'S WIDE
>> IN 1962 A VISHZ CRACK DOWNWAS
NET.
CAUGHT UP IN THE REGIME'S WIDE
HIS ANC COLLEAGUES WERE ROUNDED
NET.
UP AND JILEAD.
HIS ANC COLLEAGUES WERE ROUNDED
IN 1963 DURING WHAT CAME TO BE
UP AND JILEAD.
CALLED THE RAVONIA TRIAL, THE
IN 1963 DURING WHAT CAME TO BE
GOVERNMENT TRIED AND CONVICTED
CALLED THE RAVONIA TRIAL, THE
MANDELA AND SEVEN OF THE TOP
GOVERNMENT TRIED AND CONVICTED
COMMAND OF THE ANC ON CHARGES OF
MANDELA AND SEVEN OF THE TOP
SABOTAGE AND FOMENTING
COMMAND OF THE ANC ON CHARGES OF
REVOLUTION.
SABOTAGE AND FOMENTING
A CAPITAL OFFENSE.
REVOLUTION.
THE EIGHT WERE SENTENCED TO LIFE
A CAPITAL OFFENSE.
IN PRISON.
THE EIGHT WERE SENTENCED TO LIFE
EVEN FROM HIS CELL ON ROBIN
IN PRISON.
ISLAND, THE ALCATRAZ LIKE
EVEN FROM HIS CELL ON ROBIN
ISLAND, SIX MILES FROM CAPE
ISLAND, THE ALCATRAZ LIKE
TOWN, MANDELA WAS
ISLAND, SIX MILES FROM CAPE
UNCOMPROMISING, SAYS HELEN, A
TOWN, MANDELA WAS
PARLIAMENT SERVICE PERSON.
UNCOMPROMISING, SAYS HELEN, A
>> MATTRESSES, THE FACT THAT THR
PARLIAMENT SERVICE PERSON.
BETWEEN, AND MOSTLY ABOUT THE
>> MATTRESSES, THE FACT THAT THR
BEHAVIOR OF THE WAR DEN WHO HAS
BETWEEN, AND MOSTLY ABOUT THE
A TATTOO ON THE BACK OF HIS
BEHAVIOR OF THE WAR DEN WHO HAS
HANDS OF THE SWASTIKA.
A TATTOO ON THE BACK OF HIS
HE SAYS THIS MAN IS VERY BAD, HE
HANDS OF THE SWASTIKA.
TREATS US BADLY.
HE SAYS THIS MAN IS VERY BAD, HE
>> BUT EVEN THEN MANDELA WASEVE.
TREATS US BADLY.
>> REMARKABLY SELF CONFIDENTMAN.
>> BUT EVEN THEN MANDELA WASEVE.
HE WAS NEVER MAKING OUTRAGEOUS
>> REMARKABLY SELF CONFIDENTMAN.
REMARKS ABOUT THE GOVERNMENT.
HE WAS NEVER MAKING OUTRAGEOUS
HE WAS ALWAYS, WHAT HE SAID WAS
REMARKS ABOUT THE GOVERNMENT.
YOU KNOW, IN KEEPING WITH
HE WAS ALWAYS, WHAT HE SAID WAS
SOMEONE WHO WANTED PEACE.
YOU KNOW, IN KEEPING WITH
>> AND HE USED THE CAPTIVEAUDIEE
SOMEONE WHO WANTED PEACE.
HIS YOUNG FOLLOWERS FOR FUTURE
>> AND HE USED THE CAPTIVEAUDIEE
HE ENVISIONED, THEY EVEN CALLED
HIS YOUNG FOLLOWERS FOR FUTURE
IT MANDELA UNIVERSITY.
HE ENVISIONED, THEY EVEN CALLED
TOKIO SAPELLI WAS ONE OF THE
IT MANDELA UNIVERSITY.
STUDENTS.
TOKIO SAPELLI WAS ONE OF THE
>> HE WAS TEACHING SPIRIT OFREC.
STUDENTS.
STUDYINSTUDYING HISTORY, STUDYIG
>> HE WAS TEACHING SPIRIT OFREC.
SCIENCE.
STUDYINSTUDYING HISTORY, STUDYIG
STUDYING EVERYTHING BUT WHAT WE
SCIENCE.
WERE SUPPOSED TO EQUIP
STUDYING EVERYTHING BUT WHAT WE
OURSELVES, TO PREPARE OURSELVES
WERE SUPPOSED TO EQUIP
FOR NEW SOUTH AFRICA.
OURSELVES, TO PREPARE OURSELVES
>> MANDELA'S SENTENCE RELEASEDHT
FOR NEW SOUTH AFRICA.
OF APARTHEID PUT HIS SPIRIT WAS
>> MANDELA'S SENTENCE RELEASEDHT
FELT THROUGHOUT THE TOWNSHIPS OF
OF APARTHEID PUT HIS SPIRIT WAS
SOUTH AFRICA, CONTROL OF A BLACK
FELT THROUGHOUT THE TOWNSHIPS OF
POPULATION THAT REFUSED TO BE
SOUTH AFRICA, CONTROL OF A BLACK
SILENCED.
POPULATION THAT REFUSED TO BE
IN 1985 I MADE MY FIRST TRIP TO
SILENCED.
THE LAND OF MANDELA'S BIRTH TO
IN 1985 I MADE MY FIRST TRIP TO
FIND OUT WHAT WAS DRIVING THE
THE LAND OF MANDELA'S BIRTH TO
COUNTRY'S PEOPLE, BLACK AND
FIND OUT WHAT WAS DRIVING THE
WHITE AND ALSO TO DETERMINE HOW
COUNTRY'S PEOPLE, BLACK AND
MUCH OF MANDELA'S SPIRIT WAS
WHITE AND ALSO TO DETERMINE HOW
STILL ALIVE.
MUCH OF MANDELA'S SPIRIT WAS
>> WHAT ARE YOU SINGING ABOUT?T?
STILL ALIVE.
WHAT IS THE SONG ABOUT?
>> WHAT ARE YOU SINGING ABOUT?T?
>> MANDELA, MANDELA.SINGING.
WHAT IS THE SONG ABOUT?
>> MANDELA AND -- BATAMBO.
>> MANDELA, MANDELA.SINGING.
>> AND --
>> MANDELA AND -- BATAMBO.
>> AND EXACT,.
>> AND --
>> THERE'S ONE MAN YOU ALLRESPE.
>> AND EXACT,.
NONE OTHER THAN NELSON MANDELA,
>> THERE'S ONE MAN YOU ALLRESPE.
IF AND ONLY IF THAT MAN CAN BE
NONE OTHER THAN NELSON MANDELA,
RELEASED, HE CAN SEE THE
IF AND ONLY IF THAT MAN CAN BE
DIRECTION OF SOUTH AFRICA.
RELEASED, HE CAN SEE THE
>> IN THOSE OTHERWISE DARK DAYSE
DIRECTION OF SOUTH AFRICA.
HORIZON.
>> IN THOSE OTHERWISE DARK DAYSE
AS PRESSURE AT HOME AND ABROAD
HORIZON.
MOUNTED ON THE REGIME.
AS PRESSURE AT HOME AND ABROAD
THE APARTHEID SYSTEM WAS,
MOUNTED ON THE REGIME.
MANDELA, BEGAN SECRET
THE APARTHEID SYSTEM WAS,
NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE GOVERNMENT
MANDELA, BEGAN SECRET
THAT WOULD EVENTUALLY LEAD TO
NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE GOVERNMENT
RELEASING OF SEVERAL PRISONERS,
THAT WOULD EVENTUALLY LEAD TO
THE SOUTH AFRICAN GOVERNMENT
RELEASING OF SEVERAL PRISONERS,
ADMITTED AS MUCH TO ME IN 1985.
THE SOUTH AFRICAN GOVERNMENT
>> I MADE MY POSITION CLEAR, WEN
ADMITTED AS MUCH TO ME IN 1985.
APARTHEID.
>> I MADE MY POSITION CLEAR, WEN
>> BUT MANDELA'S OWN RELEASEWOUE
APARTHEID.
YEARS, IN 1990.
>> BUT MANDELA'S OWN RELEASEWOUE
AFTER 27 YEARS, NELSON MANDELA
YEARS, IN 1990.
TOOK HIS FIRST STEPS AS A FREE
AFTER 27 YEARS, NELSON MANDELA
MAN.
TOOK HIS FIRST STEPS AS A FREE
HE WAS 71 YEARS OLD, AND FEW HAD
MAN.
SEEN HIM OR ANY UP TO DATE
HE WAS 71 YEARS OLD, AND FEW HAD
PHOTOGRAPH OF HIM IN ALL THOSE
SEEN HIM OR ANY UP TO DATE
YEARS.
PHOTOGRAPH OF HIM IN ALL THOSE
AT HIS SIERD WERE NOW 1IE
YEARS.
MANDELA HIS DEFIANT WIFE WHO HAD
AT HIS SIERD WERE NOW 1IE
KEPT HIS NAME AND HIS MESSAGE
MANDELA HIS DEFIANT WIFE WHO HAD
I THE
KEPT HIS NAME AND HIS MESSAGE
AFRICAN NATIONAL CONFERENCE.
I THE
>> CONGRESS AND FELLOW SOUTHAFRE
AFRICAN NATIONAL CONFERENCE.
NAME OF PEACE, DEMOCRACY AND
>> CONGRESS AND FELLOW SOUTHAFRE
FREEDOM FOR ALL!
NAME OF PEACE, DEMOCRACY AND
I STAND HERE, BEFORE YOU, NOT AS
FREEDOM FOR ALL!
A PROPHET.
I STAND HERE, BEFORE YOU, NOT AS
BUT AS A HUMBLE SERVANT OF YOU,
A PROPHET.
THE PEOPLE.
BUT AS A HUMBLE SERVANT OF YOU,
TODAY, THE MAJORITY OF SOUTH
THE PEOPLE.
AFRICANS, BLACK AND WHITE,
TODAY, THE MAJORITY OF SOUTH
RECOGNIZE THAT APARTHEID HAS NO
AFRICANS, BLACK AND WHITE,
FUTURE.
RECOGNIZE THAT APARTHEID HAS NO
[ CHEERING ]
FUTURE.
>> IT HAS TO BE ENDED!BY OUR OWN
[ CHEERING ]
ORDER TO BUILD PEACE AND
>> IT HAS TO BE ENDED!BY OUR OWN
SECURITY.
ORDER TO BUILD PEACE AND
>> I LEFT FOR SOUTH AFRICA ASSOD
SECURITY.
FEW DAYS FROM HIS RELEASE I
>> I LEFT FOR SOUTH AFRICA ASSOD
FOUND MYSELF IN HIS BACKYARD,
FEW DAYS FROM HIS RELEASE I
WHEN I SOON GAINED INSIGHT INTO
FOUND MYSELF IN HIS BACKYARD,
HIS IRON RESOLVE AND HIS
WHEN I SOON GAINED INSIGHT INTO
HUMILITY.
HIS IRON RESOLVE AND HIS
>> I WAS NOT THE ONLY ONE WHOFO.
HUMILITY.
WE ALL FOUGHT THEM.
>> I WAS NOT THE ONLY ONE WHOFO.
>> IN WHAT WAY?
WE ALL FOUGHT THEM.
>> AND THE AMOUNT OF BRAVERY OFS
>> IN WHAT WAY?
ABSOLUTELY MARVELOUS.
>> AND THE AMOUNT OF BRAVERY OFS
WE HAD HUNGER STRIKES, AND
ABSOLUTELY MARVELOUS.
ANYTHING WHICH WAS CONSIDERED
WE HAD HUNGER STRIKES, AND
HUMILIATING.
ANYTHING WHICH WAS CONSIDERED
>> WERE YOU AWARE OF THISMYTHICS
HUMILIATING.
BEING BUILT UP IN THE OUTSIDE
>> WERE YOU AWARE OF THISMYTHICS
WORLD, REPORTS THROUGH
BEING BUILT UP IN THE OUTSIDE
TELEVISION, MOVIES, THIS SORT OF
WORLD, REPORTS THROUGH
THING?
TELEVISION, MOVIES, THIS SORT OF
AND DID THAT CONCERN YOU AT ALL?
THING?
>> WELL, IT DID WORRY ME A BIT.
AND DID THAT CONCERN YOU AT ALL?
>> WHY?
>> WELL, IT DID WORRY ME A BIT.
>> BECAUSE I WANTED TO BEPRESEN.
>> WHY?
AND I'M AN ORDINARY HUMAN BEING.
>> BECAUSE I WANTED TO BEPRESEN.
WITH WEAKNESSES, AND YOU DON'T
AND I'M AN ORDINARY HUMAN BEING.
WANT THAT TO BE TURNED INTO
WITH WEAKNESSES, AND YOU DON'T
SOMETHING THAT YOU ARE NOT.
WANT THAT TO BE TURNED INTO
>> STILL, NELSON MANDELA WAS THD
SOMETHING THAT YOU ARE NOT.
NO TIME ON EFFORTS TO DISMANTLE
>> STILL, NELSON MANDELA WAS THD
THE APARTHEID REGIME, EVEN
NO TIME ON EFFORTS TO DISMANTLE
BEFORE A FULL UNITED NATIONS
THE APARTHEID REGIME, EVEN
ASSEMBLY IN 1990.
BEFORE A FULL UNITED NATIONS
>> WE ALSO HAVE THE HOPE THAT WE
ASSEMBLY IN 1990.
PURSUIT OF THAT COMMON VISION
>> WE ALSO HAVE THE HOPE THAT WE
WHICH -- FALTER IN THE COMMON
PURSUIT OF THAT COMMON VISION
VISION OF A COMMON DEMOCRACY OF
WHICH -- FALTER IN THE COMMON
JUSTICE AND PEACE.
VISION OF A COMMON DEMOCRACY OF
>> IN 1993, THE YEAR BEFOREAPARD
JUSTICE AND PEACE.
HIS VISION OF A NEW SOUTH AFRICA
>> IN 1993, THE YEAR BEFOREAPARD
AS HE SHARED THE NOBEL PEACE
HIS VISION OF A NEW SOUTH AFRICA
PRIZE WITH THE MAN WHO HAD SEEN
AS HE SHARED THE NOBEL PEACE
THE HANDWRITING ON THE WALL AND
PRIZE WITH THE MAN WHO HAD SEEN
ACTED, THE LAST APARTHEID
THE HANDWRITING ON THE WALL AND
PRESIDENT, F.W. de CLERCK.
ACTED, THE LAST APARTHEID
>> THIS MUST BE THE A WORLD OFDN
PRESIDENT, F.W. de CLERCK.
RIGHTS.
>> THIS MUST BE THE A WORLD OFDN
>> BUT IN SOUTH AFRICA, CHANGEWP
RIGHTS.
OF THE REGIME AS IT HAD BLACK ON
>> BUT IN SOUTH AFRICA, CHANGEWP
BLACK INLS VO.
OF THE REGIME AS IT HAD BLACK ON
ON THE 27th OF APRIL, 1994,
BLACK INLS VO.
MANDELA HIMSELF VOTED FOR THE
ON THE 27th OF APRIL, 1994,
FIRST TIME IN HIS LIFE, AT AGE
MANDELA HIMSELF VOTED FOR THE
75.
FIRST TIME IN HIS LIFE, AT AGE
A FEW DAYS BEFORE MANDELA AND I
75.
SAT DOWN IN JOHANNESBURG, AND I
A FEW DAYS BEFORE MANDELA AND I
GOT A GLIMPSE AT HIS STEELY
SAT DOWN IN JOHANNESBURG, AND I
SIDE, THAT MANDATE LA'S
GOT A GLIMPSE AT HIS STEELY
PRESIDENCY WOULD NOT BE AS
SIDE, THAT MANDATE LA'S
POWERFUL AS HIS.
PRESIDENCY WOULD NOT BE AS
>> MY POWER OF PERSUASION ISSUF.
POWERFUL AS HIS.
I HAVE WIELDED POWER AS A
>> MY POWER OF PERSUASION ISSUF.
PRISONER, WITHOUT ACQUIRING ANY
I HAVE WIELDED POWER AS A
POSITION, AND MR. de CLERCK
PRISONER, WITHOUT ACQUIRING ANY
HAD TO RECOGNIZE THAT.
POSITION, AND MR. de CLERCK
WE HAD TO TAKE DECISIONS AND
HAD TO RECOGNIZE THAT.
FORCED HIM TO USE HIS LEGAL
WE HAD TO TAKE DECISIONS AND
POWERS, THE DECISION WAS TAKEN
FORCED HIM TO USE HIS LEGAL
BY US.
POWERS, THE DECISION WAS TAKEN
TAKE, FOR EXAMPLE, HOW HE
BY US.
DIISSSMED TWO, GAVE THEM AN
TAKE, FOR EXAMPLE, HOW HE
ULTIMATUM THAT THE JUDICIAL
DIISSSMED TWO, GAVE THEM AN
COMMISSION OF THE QUESTION OF
ULTIMATUM THAT THE JUDICIAL
VIOLENCE, HE DISMISSED TWO
COMMISSION OF THE QUESTION OF
MINISTERS.
VIOLENCE, HE DISMISSED TWO
HE WOULD NEVER DO THAT.
MINISTERS.
WE EMBARKED ON MASS ACTION.
HE WOULD NEVER DO THAT.
HE WAS FORCED TO DO EXACTLY WHAT
WE EMBARKED ON MASS ACTION.
HE SAID HE WOULD NEVER DO.
HE WAS FORCED TO DO EXACTLY WHAT
SO WHEN PARLIAMENT ISN'T BEFORE,
HE SAID HE WOULD NEVER DO.
WE ASSUMED POWER OF THE
SO WHEN PARLIAMENT ISN'T BEFORE,
GOVERNMENT AND THAT WAS HOW THE
WE ASSUMED POWER OF THE
SHOULD HAVE BEEN.
GOVERNMENT AND THAT WAS HOW THE
>> IN 1994 MANDELA TOOK ANOTHERT
SHOULD HAVE BEEN.
TOOK HIM FROM PRISONER TO
>> IN 1994 MANDELA TOOK ANOTHERT
PRESIDENT.
TOOK HIM FROM PRISONER TO
>> A SOCIETY IN WHICH ALLPARTICD
PRESIDENT.
WHITE WILL BE ABLE TO WALK TALL,
>> A SOCIETY IN WHICH ALLPARTICD
WITHOUT ANY FEAR IN THEIR HEART,
WHITE WILL BE ABLE TO WALK TALL,
WITH THE RIGHT TO HUMAN DIGNITY,
WITHOUT ANY FEAR IN THEIR HEART,
A RAINBOW NATION, AT PEACE WITH
WITH THE RIGHT TO HUMAN DIGNITY,
ITSELF AND THE WORLD.
A RAINBOW NATION, AT PEACE WITH
>> ELEMENTS OF THE REPRESSIVEAPT
ITSELF AND THE WORLD.
MANDELA AND HIS YOUNG GOVERNMENT
>> ELEMENTS OF THE REPRESSIVEAPT
ROSE ABOVE THEM, INSISTING ON
MANDELA AND HIS YOUNG GOVERNMENT
FORGIVENESS AND RECONCILIATION
ROSE ABOVE THEM, INSISTING ON
WHICH WOULD BECOME THE HALLMARK
FORGIVENESS AND RECONCILIATION
OF HIS PRESIDENCY.
WHICH WOULD BECOME THE HALLMARK
>> IT IS NECESSARY FOR ONE TOHEF
OF HIS PRESIDENCY.
YOU'RE GOING TO BUILD YOUR
>> IT IS NECESSARY FOR ONE TOHEF
COUNTRY AND TO HAVE UNITY.
YOU'RE GOING TO BUILD YOUR
I AM WORKING WITH PEOPLE WHO
COUNTRY AND TO HAVE UNITY.
FOUGHT ME VERY BITTERLY, BEFORE
I AM WORKING WITH PEOPLE WHO
THE ELECTIONS.
FOUGHT ME VERY BITTERLY, BEFORE
IT WAS MY RESPONSIBILITY AS A
THE ELECTIONS.
MAN WHO IS LEADING THE MAJORITY
IT WAS MY RESPONSIBILITY AS A
PARTY, MY RESPONSIBILITY TO HEAO
MAN WHO IS LEADING THE MAJORITY
WORK WITH MEN WHO WERE MY
PARTY, MY RESPONSIBILITY TO HEAO
OPERATIVES.
WORK WITH MEN WHO WERE MY
>> MANDELA KEPT HIS PARDON OFTHS
OPERATIVES.
CALLED THE TRUTH AND
>> MANDELA KEPT HIS PARDON OFTHS
RECONCILIATION COMMISSION.
CALLED THE TRUTH AND
COUNTLESS BLACK VICTIMS CAME
RECONCILIATION COMMISSION.
FORWARD BUT ALMOST NONE OF THE
COUNTLESS BLACK VICTIMS CAME
WHITES WHO HAD ORDERED OR
FORWARD BUT ALMOST NONE OF THE
COMMITTED ATROCITIES DID OR TOLD
WHITES WHO HAD ORDERED OR
THE TRUTH.
COMMITTED ATROCITIES DID OR TOLD
BUT THE PROCESS IS CREDITED WITH
THE TRUTH.
AVERTING A BLOODBATH AS THE
BUT THE PROCESS IS CREDITED WITH
GOVERNMENT CHANGED FROM WHITE TO
AVERTING A BLOODBATH AS THE
BLACK HANDS.
GOVERNMENT CHANGED FROM WHITE TO
MOREOVER MANDELA'S GOVERNMENT
BLACK HANDS.
PUT TO REST CONCERNS THAT THE
MOREOVER MANDELA'S GOVERNMENT
ANC'S PAST LEFTIST RHETORIC
PUT TO REST CONCERNS THAT THE
WOULD LEAD TO AN ECONOMY,
ANC'S PAST LEFTIST RHETORIC
INSTEAD, HE TOLD THE WORLD HIS
WOULD LEAD TO AN ECONOMY,
GOVERNMENT WOULD BE A DEMOCRATIC
INSTEAD, HE TOLD THE WORLD HIS
EXALTIST SOCIETY AND KEPT HIS
GOVERNMENT WOULD BE A DEMOCRATIC
WORD.
EXALTIST SOCIETY AND KEPT HIS
MANDELA ALSO ESTABLISHED
WORD.
PRINCIPLES OF REDRESS AIMED AT
MANDELA ALSO ESTABLISHED
BRINGING BLACKS INTO THE
PRINCIPLES OF REDRESS AIMED AT
ECONOMIC MAINSTREAM WHILE
BRINGING BLACKS INTO THE
BUILDING MILLIONS OF HOUSES AND
ECONOMIC MAINSTREAM WHILE
BASIC SERVICES THAT DIDN'T EXIST
BUILDING MILLIONS OF HOUSES AND
FOR THE POOR.
BASIC SERVICES THAT DIDN'T EXIST
NOT ENOUGH AND NOT FAST ENOUGH
FOR THE POOR.
FOR ALL BUT ENOUGH TO EARN THE
NOT ENOUGH AND NOT FAST ENOUGH
GRATITUDE OF MILLIONS AND THE
FOR ALL BUT ENOUGH TO EARN THE
PATIENCE OF MOST OFISTS
GRATITUDE OF MILLIONS AND THE
LONG-SUFFERING -- OF ITS
PATIENCE OF MOST OFISTS
LONG-SUFFERING PEOPLE.
LONG-SUFFERING -- OF ITS
BUT MANDELA'S ONLY PERSONAL LIFE
LONG-SUFFERING PEOPLE.
SUFFERED.
BUT MANDELA'S ONLY PERSONAL LIFE
THE MANDELAS DIVORCED.
SUFFERED.
MANDELA STEPPED DOWN AFTER
THE MANDELAS DIVORCED.
SERVING ONLY ONE TERM, SETTING A
MANDELA STEPPED DOWN AFTER
NEW STANDARD ON A CONTINENT FOR
SERVING ONLY ONE TERM, SETTING A
PRESIDENT FOR LIFE.
NEW STANDARD ON A CONTINENT FOR
AT THE SAME TIME MANDELA HAD SET
PRESIDENT FOR LIFE.
THE BAR SO HIGH IT WOULD BE
AT THE SAME TIME MANDELA HAD SET
CLOSE TO IMPOSSIBLE FOR ANYONE
THE BAR SO HIGH IT WOULD BE
TO FILL HIS SHOES OR THINK OF
CLOSE TO IMPOSSIBLE FOR ANYONE
SOUTH AFRICA AS ANYTHING BUT A
TO FILL HIS SHOES OR THINK OF
NATION, CREATING PROBLEMS FOR
SOUTH AFRICA AS ANYTHING BUT A
ANYONE NOT THE ICON MANDELA HAD
NATION, CREATING PROBLEMS FOR
BECOME.
ANYONE NOT THE ICON MANDELA HAD
NOT LEAST BECAUSE THE ICON
BECOME.
STAYED IN THE ADORING PUBLIC'S
NOT LEAST BECAUSE THE ICON
EYE.
STAYED IN THE ADORING PUBLIC'S
ON HIS 80th BIRTHDAY MANDELA
EYE.
MARRIED HIS THIRD LIFE, GRACA
ON HIS 80th BIRTHDAY MANDELA
MACHEL, WIDOW OF PRESIDENT
MARRIED HIS THIRD LIFE, GRACA
MACHEL.
MACHEL, WIDOW OF PRESIDENT
MANDELA ANNOUNCED HIS RETIREMENT
MACHEL.
FROM PUBLIC LIFE.
MANDELA ANNOUNCED HIS RETIREMENT
>> DON'T CALL ME.[ Laughter ]
FROM PUBLIC LIFE.
>> I'LL CALL YOU[ Laughter ]
>> DON'T CALL ME.[ Laughter ]
>> BUT EVEN IN HIS LATER YEARS,.
>> I'LL CALL YOU[ Laughter ]
JOINED BY HIS WIFE IN THEIR
>> BUT EVEN IN HIS LATER YEARS,.
ADVOCACY FOR THE WORLD'S
JOINED BY HIS WIFE IN THEIR
CHILDREN AND BOLDLY MAKING UP ON
ADVOCACY FOR THE WORLD'S
THE SILENCE IN HIV AND AIDS DADE
CHILDREN AND BOLDLY MAKING UP ON
DATING BACK TO HIS OWN TIME IN
THE SILENCE IN HIV AND AIDS DADE
OFFICE.
DATING BACK TO HIS OWN TIME IN
MANDELA BEGAN TO REALIZE THE
OFFICE.
DISEASE WAS THREATENING THE
MANDELA BEGAN TO REALIZE THE
FREEDOM HE SOUGHT TO ASSURE, NOT
DISEASE WAS THREATENING THE
TO MENTION TAKING THE LIFE OF
FREEDOM HE SOUGHT TO ASSURE, NOT
HIS ONE SON.
TO MENTION TAKING THE LIFE OF
TALKING ABOUT THE ABILITY THAT
HIS ONE SON.
OTHERS OF HIGH POSITION TO JOIN
TALKING ABOUT THE ABILITY THAT
HIM THOUGH FEW DID.
OTHERS OF HIGH POSITION TO JOIN
>> BECAUSE THE PEOPLE, THAT ISW.
HIM THOUGH FEW DID.
WHERE SO THERE IS NO DIFFERENCE
>> BECAUSE THE PEOPLE, THAT ISW.
WHATSOEVER TO TURN SOMEBODY WHO
WHERE SO THERE IS NO DIFFERENCE
IS HIV POSITIVE AND MY SON.
WHATSOEVER TO TURN SOMEBODY WHO
>> MANDELA WAS EQUALLY POSITIVES
IS HIV POSITIVE AND MY SON.
OWN AND GRACA MAVHEL.
>> MANDELA WAS EQUALLY POSITIVES
HONOR HIM FROM FAR AND NEAR AS
OWN AND GRACA MAVHEL.
HE BECOMES AN ANCESTOR.
HONOR HIM FROM FAR AND NEAR AS
BURIED IN THE MANDELA FAMILY
HE BECOMES AN ANCESTOR.
CEMETERY IN HIS QUIET VILLAGE,
BURIED IN THE MANDELA FAMILY
FREE AT LAST FROM HIS EPIC
CEMETERY IN HIS QUIET VILLAGE,
JOURNEY, FREE TO TAKE A MOMENT
FREE AT LAST FROM HIS EPIC
OF REST ON HIS NOW LONG WALK TO
JOURNEY, FREE TO TAKE A MOMENT
ETERNITY.
OF REST ON HIS NOW LONG WALK TO
>> THAT'S CHARLAYNE HUNTERGAULT.
ETERNITY.
>> Ifill: FOR THAT WE TURN TO
>> THAT'S CHARLAYNE HUNTERGAULT.
THREE PEOPLE KNEW OR WATCHED
>> Ifill: FOR THAT WE TURN TO
SOUTH AFRICA FOR DECADES.
THREE PEOPLE KNEW OR WATCHED
GAY McDOUGALL WAS A MEMBER THE
SOUTH AFRICA FOR DECADES.
SOUTH AFRICAN ELECTION
GAY McDOUGALL WAS A MEMBER THE
COMMISSION WHICH ADMINISTERED
SOUTH AFRICAN ELECTION
THE COUNTRY'S FIRST DEMOCRATIC,
COMMISSION WHICH ADMINISTERED
NON-RACIAL ELECTIONS IN 1994.
THE COUNTRY'S FIRST DEMOCRATIC,
PRIOR TO THAT, SHE SERVED AS
NON-RACIAL ELECTIONS IN 1994.
DIRECTOR OF THE SOUTHERN AFRICA
PRIOR TO THAT, SHE SERVED AS
PROJECT OF THE LAWYERS COMMITTEE
DIRECTOR OF THE SOUTHERN AFRICA
FOR CIVIL RIGHTS UNDER LAW.
PROJECT OF THE LAWYERS COMMITTEE
DOUGLAS FOSTER IS THE AUTHOR OF
FOR CIVIL RIGHTS UNDER LAW.
"AFTER MANDELA: THE STRUGGLE FOR
DOUGLAS FOSTER IS THE AUTHOR OF
FREEDOM IN POST-APARTHEID SOUTH
"AFTER MANDELA: THE STRUGGLE FOR
AFRICA."
FREEDOM IN POST-APARTHEID SOUTH
HE'S AN ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR AT
AFRICA."
NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY'S MEDILL
HE'S AN ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR AT
SCHOOL OF JOURNALISM.
NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY'S MEDILL
DONALD GIBB
SCHOOL OF JOURNALISM.
AND JOHN STREMLAU IS VICE
DONALD GIBB
PRESIDENT FOR PEACE PROGRAMS AT
AND JOHN STREMLAU IS VICE
THE CARTER CENTER.
PRESIDENT FOR PEACE PROGRAMS AT
HE TAUGHT AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
THE CARTER CENTER.
THE WITWATERSRAND IN
HE TAUGHT AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
JOHANNESBURG.
THE WITWATERSRAND IN
>> WELCOME TO YOU ALL.GAY MCDOUR
JOHANNESBURG.
FIRST REACTION TONIGHT ON
>> WELCOME TO YOU ALL.GAY MCDOUR
HEARING OF THE LOSS OF NELSON
FIRST REACTION TONIGHT ON
MANDELA?
HEARING OF THE LOSS OF NELSON
>> WELL, I'M TERRIBLY SAD.OF CO.
MANDELA?
WE KNEW IT WAS COMING.
>> WELL, I'M TERRIBLY SAD.OF CO.
BUT NEVERTHELESS, IT IS A SHOCK.
WE KNEW IT WAS COMING.
AND IT'S QUITE SAD THING.
BUT NEVERTHELESS, IT IS A SHOCK.
I THINK FIRST OF ALL, THE PEOPLE
AND IT'S QUITE SAD THING.
OF SOUTH AFRICA WHO WOULD BE
I THINK FIRST OF ALL, THE PEOPLE
MOURNING IN A VERY SPECIAL WAY,
OF SOUTH AFRICA WHO WOULD BE
BUT I THINK ALL AROUND THE WORLD
MOURNING IN A VERY SPECIAL WAY,
HAS LOST A HERO, A HERO THAT WE
BUT I THINK ALL AROUND THE WORLD
DESPERATELY NEEDED, WHEN HE CAME
HAS LOST A HERO, A HERO THAT WE
FORWARD AND FAIF US HOPE.
DESPERATELY NEEDED, WHEN HE CAME
>> -- GAVE US HOPE.
FORWARD AND FAIF US HOPE.
>> AS WE CONTINUE THISCONVERSAT.
>> -- GAVE US HOPE.
WE DO WANT TO SAY TO LOCAL
>> AS WE CONTINUE THISCONVERSAT.
STATIONS THAT WE ARE NOT GOING
WE DO WANT TO SAY TO LOCAL
TO BE TAKING A BREAK TONIGHT SO
STATIONS THAT WE ARE NOT GOING
WE CAN CONTINUE TO DISCUSS
TO BE TAKING A BREAK TONIGHT SO
NELSON MANDELA'S LIFE AND
WE CAN CONTINUE TO DISCUSS
LEGACY.
NELSON MANDELA'S LIFE AND
AND I WANT TO PICK UP WITH YOU
LEGACY.
PROFESSIONAL JOHN STREMLAU.
AND I WANT TO PICK UP WITH YOU
YOU TAUGHT AS GWEN JUST SAID IN
PROFESSIONAL JOHN STREMLAU.
SOUTH AFRICA FOR A NUMBER OF
YOU TAUGHT AS GWEN JUST SAID IN
YEARS AFTER NELSON MANDELA WAS
SOUTH AFRICA FOR A NUMBER OF
RELEASED.
YEARS AFTER NELSON MANDELA WAS
WHAT DID YOU SEE OF THE MAN?
RELEASED.
WHAT DID HE MEAN TO HIS COUNTRY?
WHAT DID YOU SEE OF THE MAN?
>> EL WITH, HE -- WELL HE MEANS.
WHAT DID HE MEAN TO HIS COUNTRY?
I THINK THE CHALLENGE IS TO LIVE
>> EL WITH, HE -- WELL HE MEANS.
UP TO THE EXAMPLE AS HE SET, AS
I THINK THE CHALLENGE IS TO LIVE
PRESIDENT OBAMA INDICATED.
UP TO THE EXAMPLE AS HE SET, AS
WHAT WAS GREAT ABOUT MANDELA WAS
PRESIDENT OBAMA INDICATED.
HIS RESPECT FOR THE RULE OF LAW.
WHAT WAS GREAT ABOUT MANDELA WAS
THINK ABOUT IT FOR JUST A
HIS RESPECT FOR THE RULE OF LAW.
MOMENT.
THINK ABOUT IT FOR JUST A
27 YEARS IN JAIL ON AN ILL
MOMENT.
LEGITIMATE SITUATION, HIS
27 YEARS IN JAIL ON AN ILL
ADVISOR SAID NO NO NO YOU CAN'T
LEGITIMATE SITUATION, HIS
DO IT, YOU CAN'T APPEAR ON THIS
ADVISOR SAID NO NO NO YOU CAN'T
CASE OF RUGBY AND
DO IT, YOU CAN'T APPEAR ON THIS
DISCRIMINATION, A LIBEL SET OF
CASE OF RUGBY AND
SOME SORT, IT WAS THAT STUBBORN
DISCRIMINATION, A LIBEL SET OF
SENSE OF FAIRNESS WHICH KEPT THE
SOME SORT, IT WAS THAT STUBBORN
PROCESS ON TRACK.
SENSE OF FAIRNESS WHICH KEPT THE
AND WE AMERICANS OWE HIM AND THE
PROCESS ON TRACK.
COUNTRY OF SOUTH AFRICA A GREAT
AND WE AMERICANS OWE HIM AND THE
DEBT.
COUNTRY OF SOUTH AFRICA A GREAT
BECAUSE NOTHING WOULD HAVE TORN
DEBT.
THIS COUNTRY APART IN THE
BECAUSE NOTHING WOULD HAVE TORN
1970s OR PERHAPS IN THE '80s
THIS COUNTRY APART IN THE
BUT A RACE WAR IN SOUTH AFRICA.
1970s OR PERHAPS IN THE '80s
SO ALL I WANT TO DO IS CELEBRATE
BUT A RACE WAR IN SOUTH AFRICA.
THIS WONDERFUL, WONDERFUL MAN.
SO ALL I WANT TO DO IS CELEBRATE
>> I ACTUALLY WANT TO PICK UP OU
THIS WONDERFUL, WONDERFUL MAN.
HAD BEEN APPOINTED BY AN AFRICAN
>> I ACTUALLY WANT TO PICK UP OU
AMERICAN PRESIDENT, YOU HAD SEEN
HAD BEEN APPOINTED BY AN AFRICAN
THE CURRENT DAY LEGACY OF NELSON
AMERICAN PRESIDENT, YOU HAD SEEN
MANDELA IN SOUTH AFRICA.
THE CURRENT DAY LEGACY OF NELSON
HOW DID IT RESONATE?
MANDELA IN SOUTH AFRICA.
>> IT RESONATED INCREDIBLY --HIE
HOW DID IT RESONATE?
COUNTRY.
>> IT RESONATED INCREDIBLY --HIE
YOU KNOW FROM PEOPLE ON THE
COUNTRY.
STREET TO PEOPLE IN GOVERNMENT.
YOU KNOW FROM PEOPLE ON THE
EVERYONE ASPIRES TO LIVE UP TO
STREET TO PEOPLE IN GOVERNMENT.
THE LEGACY HE LEFT.
EVERYONE ASPIRES TO LIVE UP TO
IT IS A DIFFICULT CHALLENGE TO
THE LEGACY HE LEFT.
LIVE UP TO SOMEONE OF HIS ICONIC
IT IS A DIFFICULT CHALLENGE TO
NATURE.
LIVE UP TO SOMEONE OF HIS ICONIC
BUT HE REALLY INSPIRED ALL OF US
NATURE.
I THINK AROUND THE WORLD.
BUT HE REALLY INSPIRED ALL OF US
AND THE MESSAGE THAT HE LEFT FOR
I THINK AROUND THE WORLD.
ALL OF US IS ONE THAT I THINK
AND THE MESSAGE THAT HE LEFT FOR
THE WORLD NEEDS, WHETHER IT'S
ALL OF US IS ONE THAT I THINK
OUR CONGRESS, OR PEOPLE AROUND
THE WORLD NEEDS, WHETHER IT'S
THE WORLD.
OUR CONGRESS, OR PEOPLE AROUND
OF PUTTING ASIDE OUR DIFFERENCES
THE WORLD.
TO WORK FOR THE GREATER GOOD.
OF PUTTING ASIDE OUR DIFFERENCES
YOU KNOW I WAS SO INSPIRED, MY
TO WORK FOR THE GREATER GOOD.
MOST INSPIRING MOMENT IN SOUTH
YOU KNOW I WAS SO INSPIRED, MY
AFRICA WAS ACTUALLY HOLDING SOME
MOST INSPIRING MOMENT IN SOUTH
OF THE LETTERS THAT HE WROTE
AFRICA WAS ACTUALLY HOLDING SOME
FROM PRISON.
OF THE LETTERS THAT HE WROTE
AT THE CENTER FOR MEMORY.
FROM PRISON.
AND READING ABOUT WHAT HE GAVE
AT THE CENTER FOR MEMORY.
UP TO FIGHT FOR FREEDOM AND TO
AND READING ABOUT WHAT HE GAVE
FIGHT FOR A BETTER SOUTH AFRICA
UP TO FIGHT FOR FREEDOM AND TO
FOR EVERYONE.
FIGHT FOR A BETTER SOUTH AFRICA
AND I THINK IF, GIVEN WHAT HE
FOR EVERYONE.
GAVE UP, WE ALL NEED TO TAKE
AND I THINK IF, GIVEN WHAT HE
THIS MOMENT AND DECIDE HOW WE
GAVE UP, WE ALL NEED TO TAKE
CAN MAKE THE WORLD A BETTER
THIS MOMENT AND DECIDE HOW WE
PLACE.
CAN MAKE THE WORLD A BETTER
>> DOUGLAS FOSTER, YOU GOT TOKNE
PLACE.
LAST DECADE YOU MOVED TO SOUTH
>> DOUGLAS FOSTER, YOU GOT TOKNE
AFRICA FOR A TIME TO WRITE A
LAST DECADE YOU MOVED TO SOUTH
BOOK ABOUT WHAT, AFTER MANDELA,
AFRICA FOR A TIME TO WRITE A
THE STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM AFTER
BOOK ABOUT WHAT, AFTER MANDELA,
HIS TIME AS PRESIDENT.
THE STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM AFTER
WHAT HOW DID YOU EXPERIENCE
HIS TIME AS PRESIDENT.
THIS?
WHAT HOW DID YOU EXPERIENCE
WHAT WOULD YOU ADD TO THIS
THIS?
QUESTION OF HIS AFFEC EFFECT ONE
WHAT WOULD YOU ADD TO THIS
COUNTRY?
QUESTION OF HIS AFFEC EFFECT ONE
>> SURE, I GOT TO KNOW THE OLDMN
COUNTRY?
SOUTH AFRICA THROUGH HIS
>> SURE, I GOT TO KNOW THE OLDMN
GRANDCHILDREN, PRIMARILY THROUGH
SOUTH AFRICA THROUGH HIS
HIS GRANDSON ENDABA.
GRANDCHILDREN, PRIMARILY THROUGH
THE LAST TIME I SAW HIM IN JAFG,
HIS GRANDSON ENDABA.
HE JOHANNESBURG, HE DID THIS
THE LAST TIME I SAW HIM IN JAFG,
INCREDIBLE PUCKISH THING.
HE JOHANNESBURG, HE DID THIS
HE SAID OH, IT'S NICE THAT YOUNG
INCREDIBLE PUCKISH THING.
PEOPLE STILL COME TO A OLD MAN
HE SAID OH, IT'S NICE THAT YOUNG
WHO HAS NOTHING TO SAY.
PEOPLE STILL COME TO A OLD MAN
I THINK ONE OF THE IMPORTANT
WHO HAS NOTHING TO SAY.
LEGACIES OF NELSON MANDELA IS TO
I THINK ONE OF THE IMPORTANT
HAVE GIVEN THE CHALLENGE TO HALF
LEGACIES OF NELSON MANDELA IS TO
OF THE POPULATION IN SOUTH
HAVE GIVEN THE CHALLENGE TO HALF
AFRICA THAT IS 24 AND UNDER AND
OF THE POPULATION IN SOUTH
DIDN'T HAVE DIRECT EXPERIENCE OF
AFRICA THAT IS 24 AND UNDER AND
CONDITIONS UNDER APARTHEID TO
DIDN'T HAVE DIRECT EXPERIENCE OF
UNDERSTAND THAT THIS IS THEIR
CONDITIONS UNDER APARTHEID TO
MOMENT.
UNDERSTAND THAT THIS IS THEIR
AND THE TIME TO SHOUT THE
MOMENT.
FREEDOM OF ONE OF THEIR NAMES
AND THE TIME TO SHOUT THE
AND THE SOUTH AFRICAN EDITOR
FREEDOM OF ONE OF THEIR NAMES
SAID NELSON MANDELA HAD PREPARED
AND THE SOUTH AFRICAN EDITOR
HIS PEOPLE FOR HIS PASSING IN AN
SAID NELSON MANDELA HAD PREPARED
UNUSUAL WAY, SHE SAID, QUOTE,
HIS PEOPLE FOR HIS PASSING IN AN
LIKE A GOOD PARENT, UNQUOTE.
UNUSUAL WAY, SHE SAID, QUOTE,
THAT'S WORTH MARKING ON A DAY
LIKE A GOOD PARENT, UNQUOTE.
LIKE THIS, THAT MOST LEADERS
THAT'S WORTH MARKING ON A DAY
ATTEMPT TO, ONE OF NELSON
LIKE THIS, THAT MOST LEADERS
MANDELA'S GREAT GIFTS WAS TO
ATTEMPT TO, ONE OF NELSON
LIVE LONG ENOUGH AND TO BE
MANDELA'S GREAT GIFTS WAS TO
CONSCIOUS ENOUGH TO STEPAY HAS S
LIVE LONG ENOUGH AND TO BE
PEOPLE THE GIFT OF
CONSCIOUS ENOUGH TO STEPAY HAS S
DISPENSABILITY, THE CREATION OF
PEOPLE THE GIFT OF
A NONRACIAL NONSEXIST,
DISPENSABILITY, THE CREATION OF
NONHOMOPHOBIC SOCIETY THAT
A NONRACIAL NONSEXIST,
SURVIVES HIM.
NONHOMOPHOBIC SOCIETY THAT
>> I WANT TO ASK YOU, THE SENSEF
SURVIVES HIM.
PRESIDENT OF SOUTH AFRICA, WHERE
>> I WANT TO ASK YOU, THE SENSEF
THAT HAD AN EFFECT ON OTHERS
PRESIDENT OF SOUTH AFRICA, WHERE
ARNOLD THE REGION?
THAT HAD AN EFFECT ON OTHERS
>> I THINK HE INSPIRES PEOPLEARD
ARNOLD THE REGION?
THE WORLD.
>> I THINK HE INSPIRES PEOPLEARD
I WITNESSED PEOPLE COMING TO
THE WORLD.
SOUTH AFRICA TO PAY TRIBUTE TO
I WITNESSED PEOPLE COMING TO
HIM DURING THE WORLD CUP AND AT
SOUTH AFRICA TO PAY TRIBUTE TO
OTHER MOMENTS.
HIM DURING THE WORLD CUP AND AT
THERE IS NO GREATER FIGURE IN MY
OTHER MOMENTS.
LIFETIME, I THINK AS PRESIDENT
THERE IS NO GREATER FIGURE IN MY
OBAMA SAID, HIS INSPIRATION, I
LIFETIME, I THINK AS PRESIDENT
THINK HE HAS INSPIRED PEOPLE NOT
OBAMA SAID, HIS INSPIRATION, I
JUST IN SOUTH AFRICA OR IN
THINK HE HAS INSPIRED PEOPLE NOT
AFRICA BUT AROUND THE WORLD.
JUST IN SOUTH AFRICA OR IN
AND IN THE END WHAT HE DID IN
AFRICA BUT AROUND THE WORLD.
SOUTH AFRICA IS AN EXAMPLE THAT
AND IN THE END WHAT HE DID IN
WE ALL NEED TO FOLLOW.
SOUTH AFRICA IS AN EXAMPLE THAT
>> GAY McDOUGALL, WHAT WAS THEEO
WE ALL NEED TO FOLLOW.
ON TO BE THE GREAT LEADER THAT
>> GAY McDOUGALL, WHAT WAS THEEO
HE WAS?
ON TO BE THE GREAT LEADER THAT
QUS.
HE WAS?
>> HE WAS QUITE A REMARKABLEIND.
QUS.
I DON'T THINK THERE'S ANYTHING,
>> HE WAS QUITE A REMARKABLEIND.
HE HAS A DOWN HOME FOLKSINESS TO
I DON'T THINK THERE'S ANYTHING,
HIM AS WELL.
HE HAS A DOWN HOME FOLKSINESS TO
BUT I THINK THE MIXTURE OF
HIM AS WELL.
KNOWING HOW TO HANDLE AND TO
BUT I THINK THE MIXTURE OF
DEAL WITH POWER, THAT SEEMS VERY
KNOWING HOW TO HANDLE AND TO
MUCH AS A MEMBER OF A
DEAL WITH POWER, THAT SEEMS VERY
COLLECTIVE.
MUCH AS A MEMBER OF A
OF DECISION MAKERS.
COLLECTIVE.
AS A MEMBER OF A LIBERATION
OF DECISION MAKERS.
MOVEMENT OF A POLITICAL PARTY,
AS A MEMBER OF A LIBERATION
OF SOUTH AFRICANS AS A WHOLE.
MOVEMENT OF A POLITICAL PARTY,
I WOULD NEVER FORGET THE,
OF SOUTH AFRICANS AS A WHOLE.
REALLY, TRANSCENDENT MOMENT,
I WOULD NEVER FORGET THE,
THAT I WAS PRINCHED T PRIVILEGEE
REALLY, TRANSCENDENT MOMENT,
WITH HIM.
THAT I WAS PRINCHED T PRIVILEGEE
PUT MY NAME FORWARD TO BE ON THE
WITH HIM.
COMMISSION.
PUT MY NAME FORWARD TO BE ON THE
BUT IT WAS A REMARKABLE MOMENT.
COMMISSION.
FOR HIM AND FOR HIS NATION.
BUT IT WAS A REMARKABLE MOMENT.
AND YOU KNOW ALL OF THE
FOR HIM AND FOR HIS NATION.
SUFFERING AND STRUGGLE THAT HAD
AND YOU KNOW ALL OF THE
OCCURRED BEFORE THAT MOMENT WAS
SUFFERING AND STRUGGLE THAT HAD
NOW TELESCOPED THROUGH HIM AND
OCCURRED BEFORE THAT MOMENT WAS
INTO THE FUTURE, AS HE DROPPED
NOW TELESCOPED THROUGH HIM AND
MISS BALLOT INTO THAT -- HIS
INTO THE FUTURE, AS HE DROPPED
BALLOT INTO THAT BOX.
MISS BALLOT INTO THAT -- HIS
SO HE HAS BEEN A MANIFESTATION
BALLOT INTO THAT BOX.
OF ALL OF THE HOPES AND DREAMS
SO HE HAS BEEN A MANIFESTATION
AND ASPIRATIONS OF HIS COUNTRY.
OF ALL OF THE HOPES AND DREAMS
AND HE'S BEEN ABLE TO ARTICULATE
AND ASPIRATIONS OF HIS COUNTRY.
THAT.
AND HE'S BEEN ABLE TO ARTICULATE
AND TO LIVE A LIFE THAT IS
THAT.
WORTHY OF THAT.
AND TO LIVE A LIFE THAT IS
>> JOM STREMLAU, IN WATCHINGCHA,
WORTHY OF THAT.
IT WAS HE WAS CONVINCED IN THE
>> JOM STREMLAU, IN WATCHINGCHA,
AMOUNT OF MORAL PERSUASION.
IT WAS HE WAS CONVINCED IN THE
WAS THAT A SENSE OF HIS LEGACY
AMOUNT OF MORAL PERSUASION.
AS WELL?
WAS THAT A SENSE OF HIS LEGACY
>> ABSOLUTELY, GWEN.THE ONE ERRE
AS WELL?
PRESENTATION WHICH WAS
>> ABSOLUTELY, GWEN.THE ONE ERRE
UNDERSTANDABLE AS WELL, WHEN HE
PRESENTATION WHICH WAS
SAID HE WAS JUST AN ORDINARY
UNDERSTANDABLE AS WELL, WHEN HE
MAN.
SAID HE WAS JUST AN ORDINARY
THIS IS CERTAINLY NOT AN
MAN.
ORDINARY MAN.
THIS IS CERTAINLY NOT AN
HE HAD AN APPRECIATION OF THE
ORDINARY MAN.
HUMANITY IN ALL OF US.
HE HAD AN APPRECIATION OF THE
HE TOOK AN INSPIRATION FROM
HUMANITY IN ALL OF US.
DR. KING.
HE TOOK AN INSPIRATION FROM
HE UNDERSTOOD WHAT THE CIVIL
DR. KING.
RIGHTS STRUGGLE WAS IN THIS
HE UNDERSTOOD WHAT THE CIVIL
COUNTRY AND HE UNDERSTOOD WHAT
RIGHTS STRUGGLE WAS IN THIS
TOLERANCE AND JUSTICE IS FOR
COUNTRY AND HE UNDERSTOOD WHAT
ALL.
TOLERANCE AND JUSTICE IS FOR
HIS HOPE TO MAKE SOUTH AFRICA,
ALL.
WHICH NOW CELEBRATES NEXT YEAR
HIS HOPE TO MAKE SOUTH AFRICA,
20 YEARS OF DEMOCRACY, WE ARE
WHICH NOW CELEBRATES NEXT YEAR
CELEBRATING 50 YEARS TO A TREND
20 YEARS OF DEMOCRACY, WE ARE
TOWARDS GREATER JUSTICE IN OUR
CELEBRATING 50 YEARS TO A TREND
OWN COUNTRY.
TOWARDS GREATER JUSTICE IN OUR
HE ALSO WAS WILLING TO SORT OF
OWN COUNTRY.
LOOK AT THE INDIVIDUAL IN HIS
HE ALSO WAS WILLING TO SORT OF
OWN COUNTRY AND SAY, YOU MATTER,
LOOK AT THE INDIVIDUAL IN HIS
AND WHAT YOU DO, REALLY DOES
OWN COUNTRY AND SAY, YOU MATTER,
COUNT FOR SOMETHING.
AND WHAT YOU DO, REALLY DOES
AND SO AS A PROFESSOR, THE BORN
COUNT FOR SOMETHING.
FREE, THE SO-CALLED NEW
AND SO AS A PROFESSOR, THE BORN
GENERATION OF KIDS COMING ALONG
FREE, THE SO-CALLED NEW
THAT DIDN'T
GENERATION OF KIDS COMING ALONG
HAVE TO BE REIMBUED WITH THIS
THAT DIDN'T
HISTORY OF MANDELA AS WAS SAID
HAVE TO BE REIMBUED WITH THIS
IN HIS OBITUARY.
HISTORY OF MANDELA AS WAS SAID
>> PEOPLE DO AMAZING THINGS BUTN
IN HIS OBITUARY.
HE REALLY STANDS APART.
>> PEOPLE DO AMAZING THINGS BUTN
>> WELL, I THINK IT'S PARTLY INK
HE REALLY STANDS APART.
ABOUT THE IDEA OF CONTINGENCY
>> WELL, I THINK IT'S PARTLY INK
AND HISTORY, HE STITCHED
ABOUT THE IDEA OF CONTINGENCY
TOGETHER, SO MANY DIVERGENT
AND HISTORY, HE STITCHED
PARTS OF SOUTH AFRICAN CULTURE.
TOGETHER, SO MANY DIVERGENT
HE GREW UP AS A SHOELESS COW
PARTS OF SOUTH AFRICAN CULTURE.
HERD.
HE GREW UP AS A SHOELESS COW
HE MADE SOMETHING OF HIMSELF AS
HERD.
A LAWYER.
HE MADE SOMETHING OF HIMSELF AS
BUT HE TRADED IN THAT EARNED
A LAWYER.
PRIVILEGE TO BECOME A PERSON WHO
BUT HE TRADED IN THAT EARNED
WAS DENOUNCED AS A TRAITOR IN
PRIVILEGE TO BECOME A PERSON WHO
THE UNITED STATES AND SOUTH
WAS DENOUNCED AS A TRAITOR IN
AFRICA.
THE UNITED STATES AND SOUTH
AND AS CHARLAY ISNE TOLD US,
AFRICA.
CAME OUT AS A SINGULAR VISION,
AND AS CHARLAY ISNE TOLD US,
THAT COMMITMENT AND CONSISTENCY,
CAME OUT AS A SINGULAR VISION,
THE REQUIREMENT OF A VERY
THAT COMMITMENT AND CONSISTENCY,
DISCIPLINED MIND AND A VERY
THE REQUIREMENT OF A VERY
STEELY MAN, TOO.
DISCIPLINED MIND AND A VERY
AS MUCH AS WE'RE TEMPTED ON A
STEELY MAN, TOO.
DAY LIKE THIS TO ONLY SING
AS MUCH AS WE'RE TEMPTED ON A
PRAISES ABOUT THE SOFT AND WARM
DAY LIKE THIS TO ONLY SING
SIDE, HE DID NOT SUCCEED BY
PRAISES ABOUT THE SOFT AND WARM
BEING A PUSHOVER.
SIDE, HE DID NOT SUCCEED BY
HE SUCCEEDED BY BEING VERY
BEING A PUSHOVER.
TOUGH.
HE SUCCEEDED BY BEING VERY
VERY STRATEGIC.
TOUGH.
AND COMMITTED.
VERY STRATEGIC.
ABSOLUTELY COMMITTED TO A VISION
AND COMMITTED.
DURING PERIODS WHERE ONE WOULD
ABSOLUTELY COMMITTED TO A VISION
NOT HAVE GUESSED THAT IT WOULD
DURING PERIODS WHERE ONE WOULD
SUCCEED.
NOT HAVE GUESSED THAT IT WOULD
>> GAY MCDOUGALL, HERE INWASHINA
SUCCEED.
REMODELED SOUTH AFRICAN EMBASSY,
>> GAY MCDOUGALL, HERE INWASHINA
THERE IS A STATUTE GOING UP,
REMODELED SOUTH AFRICAN EMBASSY,
MANDELA WITH HIS FIFT FIST UP IE
THERE IS A STATUTE GOING UP,
AIR.
MANDELA WITH HIS FIFT FIST UP IE
AS YOU THINK OF NELSON MANDELA
AIR.
TONIGHT AND YOU THINK LEGACY,
AS YOU THINK OF NELSON MANDELA
HOW DO YOU THINK ABOUT HIS
TONIGHT AND YOU THINK LEGACY,
EFFECT ON THE PRESENT AND THE
HOW DO YOU THINK ABOUT HIS
FUTURE?
EFFECT ON THE PRESENT AND THE
>> WELL, I THINK THAT HE STANDSN
FUTURE?
COMMITMENT.
>> WELL, I THINK THAT HE STANDSN
FOR BEING TRUE TO ONE'S
COMMITMENT.
PRINCIPLES.
FOR BEING TRUE TO ONE'S
OF WORKING WITH PEOPLE WHO SHARE
PRINCIPLES.
THAT KIND OF A VISION.
OF WORKING WITH PEOPLE WHO SHARE
AND OF MODELING THE NEW KIND OF
THAT KIND OF A VISION.
LEADERSHIP FOR THE -- I THINK
AND OF MODELING THE NEW KIND OF
THERE ARE LFN LESSONS OF YOUNG
LEADERSHIP FOR THE -- I THINK
PEOPLE IN THE UNITED STATES AS
THERE ARE LFN LESSONS OF YOUNG
WELL AS SOUTH AFRICA ARE GOING
PEOPLE IN THE UNITED STATES AS
TO QUOWL CONTINUOUSLY TURN TO.
WELL AS SOUTH AFRICA ARE GOING
HIS LESSONS WILL LIVE FOREVER.
TO QUOWL CONTINUOUSLY TURN TO.
WHILE WE OF COURSE ALL MOURN HIS
HIS LESSONS WILL LIVE FOREVER.
PASSING, I FEEL THAT YOU KNOW
WHILE WE OF COURSE ALL MOURN HIS
VERY SOONG WE WILL -- SOON WE
PASSING, I FEEL THAT YOU KNOW
WILL BE TAKEN WITH HOW MUCH OF A
VERY SOONG WE WILL -- SOON WE
GIFT HIS LIFE HAS BEEN TO ALL OF
WILL BE TAKEN WITH HOW MUCH OF A
US.
GIFT HIS LIFE HAS BEEN TO ALL OF
>> WELL, GAY MCDOUGALL, WE THANN
US.
STREMLAU AND DOUGLAS FOSTER, AND
>> WELL, GAY MCDOUGALL, WE THANN
AMBASSADOR GIPS WHO WAS WITH US
STREMLAU AND DOUGLAS FOSTER, AND
FOR A FEW MINUTES.
AMBASSADOR GIPS WHO WAS WITH US
WE APPRECIATE YOU BEING WITH US
FOR A FEW MINUTES.
ON THIS DAY.
WE APPRECIATE YOU BEING WITH US
>> THANK
ON THIS DAY.
>> Woodruff: PBS'S SPECIAL
>> THANK
COVERAGE OF MANDELA'S DEATH
>> Woodruff: PBS'S SPECIAL
INCLUDES A FRONTLINE
COVERAGE OF MANDELA'S DEATH
DOCUMENTARY: "THE LONG WALK OF
INCLUDES A FRONTLINE
NELSON MANDELA: AN INTIMATE
DOCUMENTARY: "THE LONG WALK OF
PORTRAIT OF ONE OF THE 20th
NELSON MANDELA: AN INTIMATE
CENTURY'S GREATEST LEADERS."
>> Ifill: IN ADDITION TO THE
PASSING OF NELSON MANDELA, THERE
WAS OTHER NEWS TODAY: THE U.S.
ECONOMY GAVE OFF A NEW ROUND OF
MIXED SIGNALS-- A DAY BEFORE THE
LATEST UNEMPLOYMENT AND JOB
CREATION NUMBERS COME OUT.
THE COMMERCE DEPARTMENT REPORTED
GROWTH HIT AN ANNUAL RATE OF
3.6% BETWEEN JULY AND SEPTEMBER-
- THE BEST SINCE EARLY 2012.
AT THE SAME TIME, CONSUMER
SPENDING WAS THE WEAKEST IN
NEARLY FOUR YEARS.
MEANWHILE, THE WHITE HOUSE
LOBBIED TO KEEP BENEFITS GOING
FOR THE LONG-TERM UNEMPLOYED.
WHITE HOUSE PRESS SECRETARY JAY
CARNEY.
>> EVEN THOUGH THE UNEMPLOYMENT
RATE HAS COME DOWN SIGNIFICANTLY
FROM ITS HIGH BECAUSE OF THE
GREAT RECESSION, IT IS STILL TOO
MUCH TOO HIGH AT 7.3%,
CONSIDERABLY HIGHER THAN IT WAS,
WHEN IT WAS THE RIGHT THING TO
DO FOR PRESIDENT BUSH TO SIGN
INTO LAW AN EXTENSION OF
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE.
SO IF IT WAS RIGHT THEN, IT IS
CERTAINLY RIGHT NOW TO DO.
>> Ifill: REPUBLICANS HAVE
ARGUED THAT EXTENDED BENEFITS
MAY MAKE IT MORE ATTRACTIVE TO
STAY UNEMPLOYED, THAN TO
ACTIVELY SEEK WORK.
HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER HAD
THIS TO SAY TODAY.
>> IF THE PRESIDENT HAS A PLAN
FOR EXTENDING UNEMPLOYMENT, I'D
SURELY ENTERTAIN TAKING A
LOOKING AT IT.
BUT I WOULD ARGUE THE
PRESIDENT'S REAL FOCUS OUGHT TO
BE CREATING A BETTER ENVIRONMENT
FOR OUR ECONOMY AND CREATING
MORE JOBS FOR THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE.
THAT'S WHERE THE FOCUS IS, NOT
MORE GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS.
>> Ifill: THE WHITE HOUSE SAYS
IF CONGRESS DOES NOT EXTEND THE
PROGRAM, 3.6 MILLION AMERICANS
WILL RUN OUT OF BENEFITS OVER
THE NEXT 12 MONTHS.
FAST FOOD WORKERS WALKED OFF THE
JOB AND HELD RALLIES TODAY IN A
NUMBER OF CITIES, DEMANDING
BETTER WAGES.
ORGANIZERS SAID THEY WANT $15 AN
HOUR.
THE CURRENT FEDERAL MINIMUM WAGE
IS $7.25 AN HOUR AND WAS LAST
RAISED IN 2009.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS CALLED FOR
RAISING THE FEDERAL MINIMUM
WAGE, BUT PROSPECTS FOR PASSAGE
IN CONGRESS ARE UNCERTAIN AT
BEST.
AN ARCTIC BLAST KEPT THE
NORTHERN PLAINS IN THE DEEP
FREEZE TODAY, AND SPREAD EAST
AND SOUTH.
PARTS OF NORTH DAKOTA EXPECTED
WIND CHILLS OF 40 BELOW ZERO.
IN DENVER, THE BITTER COLD HADIY
THIS MORNING.
SNOW ARRIVED BEFORE DAWN IN
WICHITA,  WHILE OKLAHOMA AND
ARKANSAS FACED A POSSIE IBLCE
STORM THIS EVENING.
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN EUROPE ARE
FACING WHAT COULD BE THEIR MOST
POWERFUL STORM IN YEARS.
AT LEAST THREE PEOPLE DIED
TODAY, AS HURRICANE-FORCE WINDS
SWEPT OUT OF THE NORTH SEA.
WE HAVE A REPORT FROM LIAM
DUTTON OF INDEPENDENT TELEVISION
NEWS.
>> Reporter: DECEMBER.
A TIME OF YEAR WHEN YOU WOULD
EXPECT THE BRITISH WEATHER TO
DELIVER IT'S WORST AND TODAY IT
DID.
SCOTLAND BORE THE BRUNT OF
TODAY'S DAMAGING WINDS WITH
GUSTS OF AROUND 90 MILES AN HOUR
HITTING MUCH OF THE COUNTRY.
TRANSPORT WAS SEVERELY AFFECTED
WITH ALL TRAIN SERVICES
SUSPENDED FOR A TIME THIS
MORNING BEFORE SLOWLY RETURNING
TO NORMAL THIS AFTERNOON.
THE PILOT OF THIS PLANE HAD TO
ABORT LANDING AT BIRMINGHAM
AIRPORT BUFFETED BY STRONG
CROSSWINDS.
100,000 HOMES IN SCOTLAND WERE
LEFT WITHOUT ELECTRICITY WITH
ANOTHER SEVERAL THOUSAND HOMES
IN NORTHERN IRELAND AND NORTHERN
ENGLAND AFFECTED AS THE STRONG
NDSWI MOVE SOUTHWARDS.
IN NORTH WALES AS WELL AS GALES,
EMERGENCY SERVICES WERE PREPARED
FOR COASTAL FLOODING AS LARGE
WAVES COMBINED WITH HIGH TIDES
WERE EXPECTED TO CRASH OVER SEA
WALLS.
PARTS OF NEWCASTLE CITY CENTER
ARE FLOODED THIS EVENING AFTER
THE RIVER THINE BURST ITS BANKS.
TONIGHT THE RISK OF COASTAL
FLOODING CONTINUES FOR NORTH SEA
COASTS WHERE THE ENVIRONMENT
AGENCY ARE WARNING OF THE WORST
STORM SURGE IN 60 YEARS.
THOSE DEADLY FLOODS OF 1953 TOOK
THE LIVES OF MORE THAN 350
PEOPLE IN ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND
AS THE TORRENT OF WATER HIT THE
COASTLINE.
TODAY'S STORM IS NOW HEADING FOR
NORTHERN EUROPE TAKING THE
STORMY WEATHER AWAY FROM THE UK
WITH THE DANGER OF FLOODING
COAST RECEDING LATE TOMORROW.
THE U.N. SECURITY COUNCIL
AUTHORIZED NEW MILITARY ACTION
IN THE WAR-TORN CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC TODAY.
THE FORMER FRENCH COLONY HAS
DESCENDED INTO CHAOS SINCE A
COUP LAST MARCH.
A REPORTED 100 PEOPLE DIED TODAY
AS MUSLIMS AND CHRISTIANS
BATTLED IN THE CAPITAL.
IN YEMEN, A COORDINATED ATTACK
KILLED MORE THAN 50 PEOPLE AT
THE DEFENSE MINISTRY.
THE VICTIMS WERE MEDICAL
STAFFERS, INCLUDING A NUMBER OF
FOREIGNERS.
SMOKE BILLOWED AFTER A SUICIDE
BOMBER DROVE A CAR PACKED WITH
EXPLOSIVES THROUGH THE COMPLEX'S
GATES.
THE BLAST CLEARED THE WAY FOR A
VEHICLE FULL OF GUNMEN IN ARMY
UNIFORMS TO STORM THE COMPOUND.
AN AMERICAN TEACHER-- RONNIE
SMITH-- WAS SHOT TO DEATH TODAY
IN BENGHAZI, LIBYA, BY UNKNOWN
GUNMEN.
HE TAUGHT CHEMISTRY AT THE
INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL THE.ER
LOCAL OFFICIALS SAID HE'D BEEN
JOGGING NEAR THE U.S. CONSULATE,
WHERE THE AMBASSADOR AND THREE
OTHER AMERICANS WERE KILLED LAST
YEAR.
THE QUARTERBACK FOR TOP-RANKED
FLORIDA STATE UNIVERSITY WILL
NOT FACE SEXUAL ASSAULT CHARGES.
A WOMAN HAD ACCUSED JAMEIS
WINSTON OF RAPING HER LAST
DECEMBER.
WINSTON'S ATTORNEY SAID THE SEX
WAS CONSENSUAL.
THE INVESTIGATION HAD BEEN
INACTIVE, UNTIL NEWS ACCOUNTS
SURFACED RECENTLY.
TODAY, THE STATE ATTORNEY IN
TALLAHASSEE SAID THERE'S NOT
ENOUGH EVIDENCE TO PROCEED.
>> WE DO NOT BELIEVE AFTER WE
EXAMINED ALL OF THE EVIDENCE AND
INTERVIEWED ALL OF THE WITNESSES
WE COULD FIND DID EVERYTHING WE
KNOW HOW TO DO, AND THERE MAY BE
SOMETHING ELSE WE COULD DO.
I DON'T KNOW, BUT DON'T THINK
SO.
WE CAME TO THE DECISION IT WAS
NOT A CASE WE COULD BRING
FORWARD BECAUSE WE WOULD NOT
HAVE THE BURDEN OF PROOF THE
PROBABLY CAUSE AND THE
REASONABLE LIKELIHOOD OF A
CONVICTION.
>> Ifill: 19-YEAR OLD WINSTON IS
A LEADING CONTENDER FOR THE
HEISMAN TROPHY-- THE MOST
PRESTIGIOUS AWARD IN COLLEGE
FOOTBALL.
CASES OF MEASLES ARE SURGING
THIS YEAR TO NEARLY THREE TIMES
THE ANNUAL AVERAGE.
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
REPORTED TODAY THERE'VE BEEN 175
CASES IN 2013.
MORE THAN HALF INVOLVED PEOPLE
WHO WERE NEVER VACCINATED AND
WERE INFECTED OVERSEAS.
CHINA TODAY BARRED BANKS AND
OTHER FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
FROM HANDLING BITCOIN.
THE COMPUTER-GENERATED CURRENCY
HAS BEEN WIDELY TRADED IN CHINA,
BUT THE CENTRAL BANK ISSUED A
STATEMENT SAYING IT HAS NO LEGAL
STATUS.
THE AGENCY SAID THE BAN WILL
PREVENT MONEY LAUNDERING AND
PROMOTE FINANCIAL STABILITY.
PRIVATE INDIVIDUALS ARE SLLTI
ALLOWED TO TRADE IN BITCOIN, AT
THEIR OWN RISK.
ON WALL STREET TODAY, THE DOW
JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE LOST 68
POINTS TO CLOSE AT
15,821.
THE NASDAQ FELL NEARLY FIVE
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 4,033.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
STORY OF THIS DAY: SOUTH
AFRICA'S FIRST BLACK PRESIDENT--
NELSON MANDELA-- DIED AT HIS
HOME IN JOHANNESBURG, AT THE AGE
OF 95.
HE'D BEEN ILL FOR MANY MONTHS.
THIS EVENING, THE CURRENT SOUTH
AFRICAN PRESIDENT JACOB ZUMA
ANNOUNCED MANDELA'S DEATH, AND T
SON."
OTHER REACTION ALSO POURED IN.
FORMER PRESIDENT GEORGE H.W.
BUSH PRAISED MANDELA'S
TREMENDOUS MORAL COURAGE, AND
FORMER PRESIDENT JIMMY CARTER
SAID HE GAVE NEW HOPE TO
GENERATIONS OF OPPRESSED PEOPLE
EVERYWHERE.
>> Ifill: ON THE "NEWSHOUR"
ONLINE RIGHT NOW-- A CHALLENGE
FOR STUDENTS.
WORLD
MORE REACTION FROM AROUNF THE
PBS DOCUMENTARY
WORLD
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
PBS DOCUMENTARY
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS.
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE "PBS
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS.
NEWSHOUR," THANK YOU AND GOOD
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE "PBS
NIGHT.